# pts-mw386as-linux: ports of the Mark Williams 80386 assembler

pts-mw386as-linux consits of ports of the Mark Williams 80386 assembler
(1992-11-11, part of Coherent 4.2.10) to modern platforms. Originally, in
1992--1993, the assembler was written for Coherent (a Unix clone) running on
i386 systems. The assembler was released as open source (3-clause BSD
license) on 2015-01-03, as part of open sourcing Coherent. The assembler can
read its own AT&T assembly syntax similar to GNU as(1), and can generate a
COFF object file. The assembler supports 16-bit and 32-bit mode, and it
knows most Intel 386 instructions and addressing modes.

## The binary ports

Some of the ports in pts-mw386as-linux are direct Linux i386 ports of the
released Coherent i386 binaries. Functionality is unchanged, The ported
assembler *mw386as* runs natively on Linux x86 (i386 and amd64) systems as a
Linux i386 console program. No other files are required, the Linux port of
the assembler is self-contained and statically linked (libc-independent).

One of the binary ports is a port of the 1992-11-11 binary release of the
*as* executable program (69024 bytes), part of Coherent 4.2.10. To compile
that (i.e. convert it to a Linux i386 executable), just run `./compile.sh`
on a Linux x86 (i386 or amd64) system. (If you need to download additional
files, it will tell you so, and then run `./compile.sh` again.) The output
file will be *mw386as*, which has the same size as the original *as* file,
but the Coherent-specific parts are binary-patched to be specific to Linux
i386 instead.

Compiling the *mw386as* executable program is self-contained. All the needed
tools are included in the repository (in the directory `tools/`) as
precompiled Linux i386 executables. These tools are: BusyBox (including a
shell), Perl, NASM and tiny7zx. The build process uses shell scripts, Perl
scripts and NASM source files as sources.

Some other binary releases of the Coherent *as* executable program have also
been released in 1992 and 1993, but those haven't been ported to Linux in
this repository yet. The earliest known one is from 1992-09-11, and it's
within the
[as,v](https://github.com/gspu/Coherent/blob/master/mwc/romana/relic/b/bin/as/RCS/as%2Cv)
RCS file.

## The source port

Another port in this repository is the port of the C source code to C89
(ANSI C). It's in the directory `src/`. To compile it on a Unix system (e.g.
Linux or macOS), install a C compiler, and run the script `src/compile.sh`.
The output executables are `src/as` (assembler) and `src/cdmp` (with similar
purpose as GNU objdump(1), but for COFF object files). The script will use
GCC by default, but you can make it use Clang instead (e.g. with
`src/compile.sh clang`. The script also supports compiling the assembler
using [OpenWatcom](https://github.com/open-watcom/open-watcom-v2) or
[TinyCC](https://bellard.org/tcc/). It is also straightforward to compile it
on Windows or target Windows, but there are no instructions provided.

The source port is based on the [latest
sources](https://github.com/gspu/Coherent/tree/master/mwc/romana/relic/b/bin/as)
of the assembler (1993-08-02), These sources are also part of the official
2015 Coherent official release tarball
[mwc.zip](http://www.nesssoftware.com/home/mwc/mwc.tgz), they are in the
*romana/relic/b/bin/as* directory. The pts-mw386as-linux Git repository
retains the full development history (1992--1993) of the source code, the
file revisions were imported from RCS (also in the tarball).

The source port makes the following changes:

* It changes old C syntax to C89. Mostly replaces `<stdarg.h>`, it fixes
  function prototypes, and it adds function declarations.
* It replaces calls to Coherent-specific functions with standard C library
  functions.
* It replaces the Coherent-specific printf(3) format specifier `%r`.
* It adds the implementations of some non-C89 libc functions, so the code
  compiles witha C89 libc only.
* It adds the necessary portability changes for 64-bit systems (such as
  amd64).
* It fixes tons of C compiler warnings. (There shouldn't be any more left.)
* It fixes some bugs (but the fixes don't change the output object file.)
* It adds general portability improvements for more C compilers and systems.

## How to use the assembler

The Mark Williams 80386 assembler reads assembly source files in its own
syntax very similar to AT&T (and thus GNU as(1)), and it produces COFF
object files. In 1992 and 1993 it was a goal to use the assembler as a
backend for GCC on Coherent, so it understands everything generated by GCC
at that time.

The ld(1), objdump(1) etc. tools from GNU Binutils on modern Linux still
understand COFF object files as input, but *mw386as* generates a different
flavour of COFF. A converter Perl script *fixcoff.pl* is provided by this
port. Alternatively, a simple linker Perl script *link3coff.pl* is also
provided, which can build ELF-32 Linux i386 executables directly from the
output of the assembler. See the file *hellol.s* for a hello-world assembly
program for Linux i386, with compilation instructions. For comparison, the
same program is provided in GNU as(1) syntax in the file *hellola.s*.
